---
title: Programming Lesson 0.1 - Anatomy of a method
---

Starting in 2023, we will begin programming by looking at methods from https://www.codingbat.com 

In CodingBat, our goal is to write **methods**, or small bits of code that solve a particular problem or answer a particular question. A java program will usually be built from many methods, connected together, so writing a single method is the root skill of computer programming.

Let's consider one CodingBat problem below:

---
The parameter `weekday` is true if it is a weekday, and the parameter `vacation` is true if we are on vacation. We sleep in if its not a weekday or we're on vacation.

Write code to represent this method.

```java
public boolean sleepIn(boolean weekday, boolean vacation) {
    // your job is to put code here!
}
```
---

The the example code above, there are several key terms wee need to understand before we can begin to write code. All of this information comes from the very first line of the method, which is also called the **method signature**.

* The first word in the method, `public`, tells us that this method can be used by any part of the java program. Most methods are public.

* The second word, `boolean`, is a **return type**. It tells us what *kind* of question our method will answer. Any time you see the word **boolean**, it means you have data that is either `true` or `false` - so this method will either answer with `true` (we will sleep in!) or `false` (we won't).

* The third word, `sleepIn` is the **name** of the method.

* The two phrases in the parentheses, `boolean weekday` and `boolean vacation` tell us that we need to *give* this method two pieces of information, and that both of them will either be true or false (boolean again!). The *names* `weekday` and `vacation` will be treated as **variables** - the method doesn't know what their value is, because they can be different each time the method is used. These pieces of information provided to the method are also called **parameters**.

In this case, one way this method might be used, or **called**, is with the code `sleepIn(true, false)`. We are passing two pieces of information - it IS a weekday, but we are NOT on vacation. The method should then *answer* with the value `false` because in that situation, we cannot sleep in!

## Quiz Yourself

Consider the Coding Bat method signature below:

```java
public boolean monkeyTrouble(boolen aSmile, boolean bSmile) {

}
```

1.  What is the return type of the method above?

    <details markdown="1"><summary>Click to expand answer</summary>
    `boolean`
    </details>

2.  How many parameters does this method have?

    <details markdown="1"><summary>Click to expand answer</summary>
    2
    </details>

3.  What are the name(s) of the parameter(s)?

    <details markdown="1"><summary>Click to expand answer</summary>
    `aSmile` and `bSmile`
    </details>

4.  If you wanted to call this method, letting the method know that no smiling is happening, how might you do that?

    <details markdown="1"><summary>Click to expand answer</summary>
    `monkeyTrouble(false, false)`
    </details>