---
title: Programming Notes 2.1 - Classes and Methods
---

# The structure of a class

Here is an example of a **class**:star: in java. Underneath, we will go through the class line by line to review / explain the important terms.

```java
class Ball {

    private int radius;
    private String color;
    private String type;

    private static final String SHAPE = "spherical";

    public Ball() {
        radius = 10;
        color = "orange";
        type = "basketball";
    }

    public Ball(int initialRadius, String initialColor, String initialType) {
        radius = initialRadius;
        color = intialColor;
        type = intialType;
    }

    public int getRadius() {
        return radius;
    }

    public double getVolume() {
        // volume of a sphere is 4/3 pi r^3
        return 4.0 / 3 * 3.14159 * radius * radius * radius;
    }

    public void print() {
        System.out.println("I am a " + color + " " + type+ ".");
        System.out.println("My radius is " + radius + " cm.");
    }
    
    public void setColor(String newColor) {
        color = newColor;
    }

    public void growBy(int growAmount) {
        radius = radius + grow;
    }

}
```

Let's go through this a little bit of a time, defining concepts as we go

# Classes, Instances, and attributes

The line 

```java
class Ball {
```

tells us we are defining a **class**:star: called `Ball` that will be used as a blueprint to create many different balls. 

When we create an actual ball, we call that an **instance**:star: of the ball class.

## Instance Variables (a.ka. attributes or fields)

The next three lines

```java
    private int radius;
    private String color;
    private String type;
```

define the **instance variables**:star: of the class. These three values represent the **attributes**:star: that every ball has that might be different between various instances. You will also see these called **fields** in some places. Every single ball that is created using this class will have their own copy of each of these variables, so they belong to the instance. For example, `ball1.radius` and `ball2.radius` might have different values.

These values are preceded by the word `private` to let us know that these attributes are personal to the class - only methods *inside* the class can direclty read and edit these variables. This is standard practice in java.

## Constants

The next line

```java
    public static final String SHAPE = "spherical";
```

defines a **constant**:star: that belongs to the entire class `Ball`. Every ball is spherical, so this value does not belong to a single instance, it belongs to the entire class, and it cannot change. 

Technically **static**:star: tells us the variable belongs to the class while **final**:star: tells us the variable cannot be edited, but in practice you will nearly always see them together when used in a class this way. This one is **public**:star: so that we know it can be accessed anywhere that has access to the Ball class.

# Constructors

The next several lines define two **constructors**:star:, which are special pieces of code that run when an object is created.

## No-Argument constructor

```java
    public Ball() {
        radius = 10;
        color = "orange";
        type = "basketball";
    }
```

The constructor above can be used to create, essentially, a default `Ball`. If another piece of code somewhere uses the command `Ball b1 = new Ball()`, then `b1` will become a 10-cm radius orange basketball, the default Ball object.

The **signature**:star: of this constructor is `Ball()`. That tells java that this is a constructor (because it has the same name as the class) and that it does not take any arguments (because the parentheses are empty)

The constructor is preceded by the word `public` to let us know that we will be able to use this constructor to make `Ball` objects anywhere that can see the class.

## Constructor with arguments

```java
    public Ball(int initialRadius, String initialColor, String initialType) {
        radius = initialRadius;
        color = intialColor;
        type = intialType;
    }
```

This code allows the user to create a new ball to their own specification. By using the command `Ball b2 = new Ball(15, "black and white", "soccer")`, `b2` can be created as a 15-cm radius black and white soccer ball.

The three values that are inside the parentheses are called the **parameters**:star: of the method, or the **arguments**:star: passed to the constructor. You usually see those words used interchangeably.

The signature of this constructor is `Ball(int, String, String)`. This tells java that ths defines a constructor, and that it needs to be followed by an integer and two strings.

## Overloading Constructors and signatures

We have just seen an example of **overloading**:star: in java. When two methods (or constructors) have the same *name* but different *signatures*, that is called overloading. Not every programming language allows this - JavaScript, for example, does not - but most class-based languages do.

When you have an overloaded method, java uses the **signature* (as seen in the above examples) to decide which method to use. For this reason, you can have as many methods with the same name as you want as long as they call for different *types* or use a different *order* in the parameters, but simply changing the names of the parameters is not enough.

For example, the following code is NOT allowed:

```java
public Ball(int size){
    //whatever
}
public Ball(int weight){
    //whatever
}
```

A human may read this code and think they are defining different things, but if a user types the code `Ball b3 = new Ball(10)`, how would java know which one to use? Is the 10 supposed to be the weight or the height? It won't know, because those two methods have the same signature, `Ball(int)`.

However, the following code *is* allowed:

```java
public Ball(int size) {
    //whatever
}
public Ball(double weight) {
    //whatever
}
```

because java will know if we type `Ball b2 = new Ball(12)` we mean the first one, since 12 is an int, but if we type `Ball b2 = new Ball(12.0)` we mean the second one, since 12.0 is a double. This is *confusing* but not *illegal*.

# Methods

A **method** is a behavior, action, or question that is performed by or to an object or a class. The rest of our code defines the **instance methods**:star: for balls, or actions that can be performed by or on the individual *instances*. Generally, when we just say the word *method* we mean an instance method, because they are the most common type of methods. Technically, constructors are a method as well.

## Methods with return values - non-void methods

These lines define two different **non-void**:star: methods. A non-void method is any method that can be thought of as being a *question you ask the object*, to which an answer is expected.

```java
    public int getRadius() {
        return radius;
    }

    public double getVolume() {
        // volume of a sphere is 4/3 pi r^3
        double vol = 4.0 / 3 * 3.14159 * radius * radius * radius;
        return vol;
    }
```

The first method has the signature `getRadius()`. The `int` in front of the name tells us that this method has an *answer* that is of type int - that is, when we use this method we are essentially asking the ball a question, and it will respond with an integer. We could USE this method anywhere with a line like `int d = ball1.getRadius()`. Notice the parentheses! That is how java knows you are trying to access a method and not an instance variable.

When you have a method that returns an instance variable directly, we call that method a **getter**:star: or, more formally, an **accessor**:star:. They generally, by convention, start with the word `get`.

The next method has the signature `getVolume()`. Notice that it returns a `double` but is otherwise similar to the radius on the outside. On the inside, it's doing something more complicated - rather than simply returning the instance variable, it has to calculate the volume first! For that reason it is not technically an accessor, though it works much like one.

One important thing to realize is that somebody *using* this code might not know that `getRadius()` is a basic accessor while `getVolume()` is more complex. This allows the person writing the `Ball` class to *change* how these work later, if they need to, without breaking any code that already uses those methods.

## Methods that represent actions - void methods

The final method in this class are **void**:star: methods. These methods are not questions that have an answer - they are actions, and only actions.

```java
    public void print() {
        System.out.println("I am a " + color + " " + type+ ".");
        System.out.println("My radius is " + radius + " cm.");
    }
    
    public void setColor(String newColor) {
        color = newColor;
    }

    public void growBy(int growAmount) {
        radius = radius + grow;
    }
```

The first method, `print()` is a void method with no arguments. It simply tells the ball to print a sentence about itself. A user could use this simply by running `ball1.print()` or `ball2.print()`

The second method, `setColor(String)`, is used to change the color of the ball. This is called a **setter**:star: or **mutator**:star: because it *sets* the value of the parameter, *mutating* (changing) the object itself. A user could use code like `ball1.setColor("green")` to change ball1 to being a green object.

The final method, `growBy(int)` tells the ball to grow by a certain amount. A user could use `ball2.growBy(2)` to make ball2 grow two inches larger.

None of these methods require a response - they are simply *done*. One of them, `print()` doesn't even require any arguments.

# Vocabulary

* class
* instance
* instance variable
* attribute
* field
* private
* constant
* final
* static
* public
* constructor
* no-argument constructor
* signature
* parameter
* argument
* overloading
* method
* non-void method
* void method
* getter
* accessor
* setter
* mutator